When it comes to AI applications, the difference between real time and
historical data is huge, in part because they each have unique applications.
As Mike Davie [explains](http://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs
/using-historical-data-in-the-age-of-real-time-decision-making):

"In real world terms, past traffic data can generally tell you what the
fastest average route through a city. Current traffic conditions require the
knowledge of real-time [data] including accidents, road blocks, weather
conditions and special events to effectively guide vehicles through a city."

Okay, so that examples shows how real time and historical data are different.
But what about impact, what can having access to real time data working with
AI do for a business? In this example (taken from the article linked to
above), Stella Artois used real-time data and what we guess is a decision tree
algorithm.

"By mapping historical weather data against sales metrics for its Cidre
product, Stella Artois® discovered that a two degree temperature rise above
the monthly norm triggered a rise in sales.  Digital out-of-home billboards
were identified as the optimum channel due to their proximity to stores.
Using real-time weather data, Stella Artois® ran a campaign on a cost-per-
minute basis, activating only when conditions were right to induce purchase
intent.

Results of the campaign were astounding:  

  * Stella Cidre achieved a 66% increase in YOY sales during the period of the weather-responsive campaign  (source: Nielsen Sales data 2013)
  * Cost efficiencies were up by 50% because ads were only shown during optimum conditions, thus there were no wasted impressions
  * The campaign created a lot of buzz and online engagement, generating over 0,000 in earned media value"

So when choosing what type of algorithm to use. how to apply it, finding the
right way to use historical and real time data can have a huge impact.

"Real-time data analytics and machine learning provide the keys to deploying
more and more services that offer "magical" abilities. By synthesizing not
only vast amounts of information, but vast amounts of current information,
real-time data contextualizes current observations with historical data, and
delivers either action or augmentation to human decision-makers."

-[source](https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/real-time-data-for-the-real-world)

"While looking at historical data can be useful and is often a good starting
point for becoming a more data-driven organization, companies need to acquire
the tools to harness the power of real-time data in order to take advantage of
the plethora of transformative data that is now readily available at their
fingertips. Live analysis allows businesses to boost efficiency by avoiding
unnecessary costs and identifying where operational improvements should be
made."

-[source](https://www.artisenergy.com/blog/why-real-time-data-dwarfs-historical-data)

The final two lessons will look at some of the most relevant AI applications
and business models, starting with smart contracts and licensing for AI.

If you'd like to unsubscribe, [click here](http://<unsubscribe>Unsubscribe
here</unsubscribe>). If you have feedback on how we can improve, please reply!
:)

