---
title: Business Models Using AI
description: Understand a range of ways AI is used to create value, provide strategic advantages and increase profits -- through different examples that illustrate a type of business/revenue model
class: contribute
toc:
  business-models: "Business Models"
  will-ai-really-lower-ai-costs: "Will AI Really Lower Labour Costs?"


order: 4
image: 
---


# Business Models
For the last lesson of this two week course, we want you to start thinking
about how you can apply everything you learned to your business.

> "A lot of companies are looking at AI saying: how can I do what I do today,
better and faster?That is not the question that you should be asking. The
question you should be asking is what can I do today that is fundamentally
better and different than what I could do yesterday? That's the real power of
what AI can bring to the table".

>

> -Josh Sutton, Publicis Sapient, [from AIBusiness](http://aibusiness.org
/dont-bring-a-20th-century-business-model-to-an-ai-first-world/)

Sutton frames how you can think about AI and your business model well. AI
tools exist which can provide immediate incremental improvements to existing
processes, but really investing in AI has the potential to take your
capabilities much farther. Francesco Corea outlines the challenges further in
her book Artificial Intelligence and Exponential Technologies: Business Models
Evolution and New Investment Opportunities:

> "It is possible to look at the AI sector as really similar in terms of
business models to the biopharma industry: expensive and long R&amp;D; long
investment cycle; low-probability enormous returns; concentration of funding
toward specific phases of development. There are anyway two differences
between those two fields: the experimentation phase, that is much faster and
painless for AI, and the (absent) patenting period, which forces AI to
continiously evolve and use alternative revenue models (e.g., freemium
model)."

With this in mind, it's not surprising that, as Gayle Sheppard, general
manager for Saffron Technology (a company within Intel) pointed out at CES
2015: the majority of AI is still focused on B2B and not B2C business models.
But there are still plenty of applications in both areas. For a bit of
inspiration, we recommend you check out this [huge list of both B2B and B2C
businesses using AI](https://hackernoon.com/a-list-of-artificial-intelligence-
tools-you-can-use-today-for-personal-use-1-3-7f1b60b6c94f).

After this course, do you feel prepared to discuss, invest in, plan for, etc.,
AI? We'd like to know what you feel you've learned and where you still feel
you'd like to learn more. We'll be building more courses in the future so any
feedback will go directly into developing those.



All the best from the Sources team!

# Will AI Really Lower Labour Costs?

Thinking about how AI will impact industries, the idea that AI-based
automation will push down human labor costs is rampant. But, Carlos Espinal,
investor at Seedcamp, [used a historical comparison to explain there are other
forces at play than simply lower costs](https://soundcloud.com/seedcamp
/investing-in-ai-carlos-espinal-speaking-at-the-aibe-summit-2017):

> "In the case of the 1960s Brasero program [a guest worker program for
Mexican farm workers to come to the US], it was just that the local worker was
feeling displaced by the immigrant worker. So, they cancel the Brasero
program. And the expectation was that by canceling it, all Americans could get
their jobs back.

> But the problem is that the companies had already optimized their models
around the costs and margins associated with a lower cheaper labor costs,
[making it difficult to return to a model based on higher labour costs].
Rather, what happens is the industries adapted themselves and shift the way
that they use their land for produce that was more optimized towards the kinds
of cost they could afford."

Carlos compares this situation to customer service outsourcing to cheaper work
forces, and then to AI-based automation:

> We've been exporting customer service to countries where maybe English isn't
a first language, and that became difficult. This was frustrating both for
customer service representatives and the customers themselves. The cost basis
to bring it back to the UK or the US is too high.

> We won't see those jobs return full force, but rather a mass migration to
some kind of automated customer service whereby it's good enough, and works
with specialists that deal with [particular] situations.

We did [an in depth analysis](https://medium.com/source-institute/will-ai-
adapt-to-industries-or-industries-adapt-to-ai-ef3486ccc9) of why ending the
Brasero program didn't bring labor costs back up, but the conclusion there was
that the following factors made the labor market less reactive than
anticipated:

  * How farmers make crop-planting decisions
  * Existing investment in tractors allowing for low additional capital costs for shifting to new machine-harvestable crops
  * Advanced in biology allowing leeway for farmers to shift crops and avoid higher labour costs
  * Strong pressure on farmers to adapt, caused by changes in consumer demand and distributor negotiating power

#### What's the relationship between lowering human costs and technological
efficiency in other industries?

Usually, technology development is described as adapting solutions for users
or an industry, but Carlos recognized the inverse:

> "We might actually have to shape how we look for business, and how we look
for interactions, to be able to adapt to the needs of AI."

Rather than over-generalise and claim that AI will simply take over by
creating cost-efficiencies and force industries to adapt, what other factors
do you see when you look at specific industries?

How do investment decisions get made -- what risks, capital and marginal costs
are at play? What external pressures are on the decision makers? Who has the
power? Are existing technology platforms in place that can be easily extended
to use AI? Are other technologies assisting a transition to AI?



If you'd like to unsubscribe, [click here](http://<unsubscribe>Unsubscribe
here</unsubscribe>). If you have feedback on how we can improve, please reply!
:)

