First, a clarification of the term 'off the shelf'

> "There's virtually no such thing as off the shelf AI. There are plenty of
great APIs which you could call off the shelf, for example. But, very often
you run into the need to adapt and build upon them to make anything more than
an MVP. It's similar to big data - everyone wants to claim they're off the
shelf and that's how it's pitched but in reality it often needs a good amount
of custom work.

>

> -Boyan Benev, Founder of [Gain
IM](https://www.facebook.com/gainisgood/?ref=br_rs)

Andreessen Horowitz [breaks down the overlaps between API, Library, and
SDK](http://aiplaybook.a16z.com/docs/guides/ai-using), but when discussing
"off the shelf" AI, these three concepts are included within that umbrella
term (which is a bit problematic, but that's how people are using it these
days). Also within that term are end-user software products like [Project
Dreamcatcher](https://autodeskresearch.com/projects/dreamcatcher). These
really are products you can pick up and start using without the need to
integrate or customize them for your needs. So, looking broadly at the methods
of using AI that fall within the "off the shelf" umbrella, here are some rules
of thumb:

## 'Off the Shelf' Advantages:

  * The cost is known (and probably less than a custom solution, though not 100% of the time).
  * The capabilities are known.
  * Off the shelf products are becoming more flexible (look to the Google example below)
  * Less development time.

## Off the Shelf Disadvantages:

> "The downside of commercial software is that they are in most cases complete
black boxes to the users and even to the company's engineers. These packages
are developed as single-sell products which address one specific topic or use
and could prove to be unusable if the situation and the environment changes.
Or the company has to pay for an adoption with additional extensions through
add-ons or customization contracts."

>

> -Ralf Montino and Christian Weber, from Integration of Practice-Oriented
Knowledge Technology: Trends and Prospectives

  * There is often a lack of explainability
  * Not very adaptable (yet, but again this is changing)
  * You lose potential opportunities for patenting and licensing your own AI product.

Google is also the elephant in the room when it comes to off the shelf AI
algorithms. As of their 2017 I/O event, they're working on positioning
themselves as leaders in providing the building blocks on which others can
build off the shelf tools:

> "What Google is really talking about is creating the software and the chips
that the entire AI infrastructure then is going to be built on… Google is
trying to create the foundation for that… What also Google is doing is
designing these systems where basically they're giving companies the building
blocks. And then the companies can use those building blocks to create their
own AI products. It's almost the way that right now it's so easy to create a
website, so different than what it was say 15, 20 years ago. So this is what
Google is seeing… creating an AI product will be that simple, but it will all
be tied into the Google system."

>

> -[Anna Szymanski](http://www.slate.com/authors.anna_szymanski.html) on the
[Slate Money
Podcast](http://www.slate.com/articles/podcasts/slate_money/2017/05/the_auto_industry_a_i_assistants_and_apple_s_new_headquarters.html)

But ultimately, whether you're looking to build a custom AI algorithms or use
off-the-shelf options, knowledge of how to evaluate them is critical (and a
major reason for the creation of this course):

> "In the end, the real downside [of off the shelf AI solutions] is… the gap
between the availability of complex AI methods and techniques and the missing
knowledge to judge them for buying as a product."

>

> -Ralf Montino and Christian Weber, from [Integration of Practice-Oriented
Knowledge Technology: Trends and
Prospectives](https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-642-34471-8)

At this point, [their AI is even beating their own engineers are creating more
AI](https://futurism.com/googles-new-ai-is-better-at-creating-ai-than-the-
companys-engineers/). So, consider the benefits of custom vs off the shelf and
keep an eye on what Google is doing. The next lesson will delve into the cost
side of this question in more detail.



If you'd like to unsubscribe, [click here](http://<unsubscribe>Unsubscribe
here</unsubscribe>). If you have feedback on how we can improve, please reply!
:)

